advanced/indexes.md, before:

**Table of Contents**

- [1.Basics](#1basics)
- [2. Explanation](#2-explanation)
- [3. Example](#3-example)
- [4. Usage](#4-usage)
  - [4.1. Create an Index](#41-create-an-index)
  - [4.2. Delete an Index](#42-delete-an-index)
  - [4.3. Get all existing indexes](#43-get-all-existing-indexes)
  - [4.4. Add own unique index](#44-add-own-unique-index)
  - [4.5. Partial filters](#45-partial-filters)
- [5. Kinds of indexes](#5-kinds-of-indexes)
- [5.1. Index for one field](#51-index-for-one-field)
  - [5.2. Index for multiple fields (Compound Index)](#52-index-for-multiple-fields-compound-index)

# 1.Basics

Indexes enable to

- retrieve faster a small to medium number of documents
- from a collection
- based on a field that has:
  - numbers: e.g. age, salary, height
  - strings: e.g. names, addresses
  - booleans: should NOT be use because it does not speed of the query

Don't use indexes if you have queries that

- return values with
- booleans (true, false) OR
- only two or three values (e.g. gender, priority)
- because the performance is slower

Don't use indexes if you have queries that

- regularly return the majority or all of your documents,
- using an index is mostly SLOWER
- so it should not be used in these cases

Don't use indexes for each field of a collection

- because they lead to a lower performance for `insert` OR `update` operations
- e.g. if creating an index for all fields of a collection
- because if a new document is inserted OR updated
- all indexes need to be adjusted
- because the new value needs to be added and
- the list sorted

Use indexes if `sort()` function leads to an timeout

- due to it taking to long
- e.g. `db.contacts.explain().find({"dob.age": 35}).sort({gender: 1})`

The default index `_id`

- should be used to sort documents
- by the stanard order

# 2. Explanation

An index can be thought of as an

- simple list of values + pointers
- to the original document
- e.g. `(29, "address in memory/ collection a1")`
  - The documents in the collection would be at the "addresses" a1, a2 and a3
  - The order does not have to match the order in the index (and most likely, it indeed won't).

The important thing is that the index items are **ordered**

- depending on how you created the index
- e.g. `createIndex({age: 1})`
  - value `1`: ascending
  - value `-1`: descending

The performance of the operation

- e.g. operation with an without an index
- can be measuered by
- `db.someCollection.explain("executionStats").find()`

# 3. Example

`db.products.find({seller: "Max"})`

If there is `no index` for the searched field e.g. `seller`

- MongoDB does a **COLLSCAN** (collection scan) by
- going through the complete collection and
- each document and
- look for if `seller` equals `Max`

If there is an index

- MongoDB does a **IXSCAN** (index scan) by
- recognizing that for the key `seller` an index exists and
- going to the `seller index`
- which is easier to scan for
- because it is always an ordered list of all values and
- it can directly "jump" to the filtered documents
- e.g. `Anna, Anna, Chris, Manuel, Max, Max`

# 4. Usage

## 4.1. Create an Index

Use the `createIndex()`

- by passing the respective field
- as an paremeter
- e.g. `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1})`
  - value `1`: ascending
  - value `-1`: descending

## 4.2. Delete an Index

Use the `deleteIndex()`

- by passing the created index
- as an paremeter
- e.g. `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1})`
  - value `1`: ascending
  - value `-1`: descending

## 4.3. Get all existing indexes

All existing indexes can be seen using

- `db.myCollection.getIndexes()`
- whereby the default index is `_id`

## 4.4. Add own unique index

Indexes can be configured

- using the second parameter
- for e.g. adding an own unique indexes e.g. email
- e.g. `db.contacts.createIndex({email: 1, {unique: true}})`
  - which checks if the values are unique
  - which are a must

## 4.5. Partial filters

Partial filters provide a solution to the

- problem that many values in index exist
- that you most of the times don't need
- e.g. always only need people that are over 65 for a retirement application
  - create index `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1}, {partialFilterExpression: {gender: "male"}})`
  - get data does NOT work!!!!! `db.contacts.find({"dob.age": {$gt: 60}})`
  - get data `db.contacts.find({"dob.age": {$gt: 60}, gender: "male"})`

# 5. Kinds of indexes

# 5.1. Index for one field

Example:

- creating an index `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1})`
- using the index `db.contacts.find({"dob.age": {$gt: 60}})`

## 5.2. Index for multiple fields (Compound Index)

Each entry in the index is

- NOT a single value
- BUT tow combined ones
- SO the order of the fields is
- EXTREMELY important
- e.g. Find all persons who are 35 and male
  1. create an index `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1, gender: 1})`
  2. make the query `db.contacts.explain().find({"dob.age": 35, gender: "male"})`
     - PS the order of the passed parameters does NOT matter!!!
     - PS the order of `createIndex()` does matter cause the index can be used to find
       - either age and gender (IXSCAN) OR
       - just age (IXSCAN)
       - BUT not only the right field (does the COLLSCAN)

Commit message:

how to handle unique indexes with no values

advanced/indexes.md, after:

**Table of Contents**

- [1.Basics](#1basics)
- [2. Explanation](#2-explanation)
- [3. Example](#3-example)
- [4. Usage](#4-usage)
  - [4.1. Create an Index](#41-create-an-index)
  - [4.2. Delete an Index](#42-delete-an-index)
  - [4.3. Get all existing indexes](#43-get-all-existing-indexes)
  - [4.4. Add own unique index](#44-add-own-unique-index)
  - [4.5. Partial filters](#45-partial-filters)
- [5. Kinds of indexes](#5-kinds-of-indexes)
- [5.1. Index for one field](#51-index-for-one-field)
  - [5.2. Index for multiple fields (Compound Index)](#52-index-for-multiple-fields-compound-index)

# 1.Basics

Indexes enable to

- retrieve faster a small to medium number of documents
- from a collection
- based on a field that has:
  - numbers: e.g. age, salary, height
  - strings: e.g. names, addresses
  - booleans: should NOT be use because it does not speed of the query

Don't use indexes if you have queries that

- return values with
- booleans (true, false) OR
- only two or three values (e.g. gender, priority)
- because the performance is slower

Don't use indexes if you have queries that

- regularly return the majority or all of your documents,
- using an index is mostly SLOWER
- so it should not be used in these cases

Don't use indexes for each field of a collection

- because they lead to a lower performance for `insert` OR `update` operations
- e.g. if creating an index for all fields of a collection
- because if a new document is inserted OR updated
- all indexes need to be adjusted
- because the new value needs to be added and
- the list sorted

Use indexes if `sort()` function leads to an timeout

- due to it taking to long
- e.g. `db.contacts.explain().find({"dob.age": 35}).sort({gender: 1})`

The default index `_id`

- should be used to sort documents
- by the stanard order

# 2. Explanation

An index can be thought of as an

- simple list of values + pointers
- to the original document
- e.g. `(29, "address in memory/ collection a1")`
  - The documents in the collection would be at the "addresses" a1, a2 and a3
  - The order does not have to match the order in the index (and most likely, it indeed won't).

The important thing is that the index items are **ordered**

- depending on how you created the index
- e.g. `createIndex({age: 1})`
  - value `1`: ascending
  - value `-1`: descending

The performance of the operation

- e.g. operation with an without an index
- can be measuered by
- `db.someCollection.explain("executionStats").find()`

# 3. Example

`db.products.find({seller: "Max"})`

If there is `no index` for the searched field e.g. `seller`

- MongoDB does a **COLLSCAN** (collection scan) by
- going through the complete collection and
- each document and
- look for if `seller` equals `Max`

If there is an index

- MongoDB does a **IXSCAN** (index scan) by
- recognizing that for the key `seller` an index exists and
- going to the `seller index`
- which is easier to scan for
- because it is always an ordered list of all values and
- it can directly "jump" to the filtered documents
- e.g. `Anna, Anna, Chris, Manuel, Max, Max`

# 4. Usage

## 4.1. Create an Index

Use the `createIndex()`

- by passing the respective field
- as an paremeter
- e.g. `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1})`
  - value `1`: ascending
  - value `-1`: descending

## 4.2. Delete an Index

Use the `deleteIndex()`

- by passing the created index
- as an paremeter
- e.g. `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1})`
  - value `1`: ascending
  - value `-1`: descending

## 4.3. Get all existing indexes

All existing indexes can be seen using

- `db.myCollection.getIndexes()`
- whereby the default index is `_id`

## 4.4. Add own unique index

Indexes can be configured

- using the second parameter
- for e.g. adding an own unique indexes e.g. email
- e.g. `db.contacts.createIndex({email: 1, {unique: true}})`
  - which checks if the values are unique
  - which are a must

MongoDB treats non-existing values

- still as values in an index
- so cannot insert two documents with no value
- that belong to the unique index
- PS if you want to create such an index, you need to set a `partialFilterExpression`
  - e.g. `db.users.createIndex({email: 1}, {unique: true, partialFilterExpression: {email: {$exists: true}}})`
  - so all of the not existing values are sorted out in advance

## 4.5. Partial filters

Partial filters provide a solution to the

- problem that many values in index exist
- that you most of the times don't need
- e.g. always only need people that are over 65 for a retirement application
  - create index `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1}, {partialFilterExpression: {gender: "male"}})`
  - get data does NOT work!!!!! `db.contacts.find({"dob.age": {$gt: 60}})`
  - get data `db.contacts.find({"dob.age": {$gt: 60}, gender: "male"})`

# 5. Kinds of indexes

# 5.1. Index for one field

Example:

- creating an index `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1})`
- using the index `db.contacts.find({"dob.age": {$gt: 60}})`

## 5.2. Index for multiple fields (Compound Index)

Each entry in the index is

- NOT a single value
- BUT tow combined ones
- SO the order of the fields is
- EXTREMELY important
- e.g. Find all persons who are 35 and male
  1. create an index `db.contacts.createIndex({"dob.age": 1, gender: 1})`
  2. make the query `db.contacts.explain().find({"dob.age": 35, gender: "male"})`
     - PS the order of the passed parameters does NOT matter!!!
     - PS the order of `createIndex()` does matter cause the index can be used to find
       - either age and gender (IXSCAN) OR
       - just age (IXSCAN)
       - BUT not only the right field (does the COLLSCAN)
