3_operations/crud-operations/2_read_find.md, before:

**Table of Contents**

- [Basic](#basic)
- [Methods](#methods)
  - [findOne()](#findone)
  - [find()](#find)
- [Filter](#filter)

# Basic

Get one or multiple documents

- in a collection
- e.g. `db.myCollection.find(filter, options)`
  - `db` access current database
  - `myCollection`access a collection (gets created if does not exists)
  - `find(filter, options)` method that gets executed on the collection, which parameters:
    - Filter: narrow down which documents to change
    - Options: configuration

# Methods

_For read the findOne() and find() methods exist:_

## findOne()

Get the first matching document it finds

- syntax `db.myCollection.findOne(filter, options)`
- e.g. `db.myCollection.findOne({ name: 1, contribs: 1 } )`
- gives back a document (NOT a cursor)
- arrays can be accessed via nested keys e.g. `db.users.findOne({"hobbies.title": "Sports"})`

## find()

Get one or more documents

- syntax `db.myCollection.find(filter, options)`
- e.g. `db.myCollection.find()`
- gives a cursor (not a document)
- arrays can be accessed via nested keys e.g. `db.users.find({"hobbies.title": "Sports"})`

Get **all** documents in a collection by passing

- no parameter als a filter
  - limited e.g. `db.myCollection.find()`
  - without limits e.g. `db.myCollection.find().toArray()`
  - find all documents and modify / print them `db.passengers.find().forEach((passengerData) => {printjson(passengerData)})`

**Additional functions** are possible after the find() method, such as:

- `pretty()` print the data more nicely
- `count` identify how many documents exist e.g. `db.myCollection.find().count()`
- `max()` get the max value
- `min()` get the min value
- `map()` applies a function for each document and returns the new array
- `forEach()` applies a function for each document and returns NOTHING!

Important:

- all documents are returned by passing no parameter
- a nicer format for an output can be archived via `db.products.find().pretty()`
- not all documents are return
  - MongoDB aborts after a certian amount of objects
  - because MongoDB does not encourage to return like 20 million objects
  - but the command `it` can be used to show more
  - this is because MongoDB does not return
    - an array of objects
    - but a cursor object that enables to cycle through the results
    - the function `.toArray()` will exhaust the cursor object and show everything

# Filter

_Both findOne() and find() methods support all filter possibilities:_

Actually filter the documents in a collection

- can work with nested documents using "": e.g. `db.movies.findOne({"rating.average": {$gt: 7}})`
- match equality against a **single value**: e.g. `flightData.find({intercontinental: true})` OR
- match using a **query selectors and projection operators**:

1. **query selectors**

Documents can be found using these query selectors:

**comparison**

- `eq`: find documents which equal one value certain values, whereby equality differs for primitive data and arrays:
- primitive data e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$eq: 60}})` is the same as `db.movies.findOne({runtime: 60})`
- arrays
  - contains the element e.g. `db.movies.findOne({genres: {$eq: "Drama"}})` is the same as `db.movies.findOne({genres: "Drama"})`
  - ONLY contains the element e.g. `db.movies.findOne({genres: {$eq: ["Drama"]}})` is the same as `db.movies.findOne({genres: ["Drama"]})`
- `ne`: find documents which equal NOT one value e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$ne: 60}})`
- `in`: find documents which equal MULTIPLE values e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$in: [30, 42]}})`
- `nin`: find documents which NOT equal MULTIPLE values e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$nin: [30, 42]}})`
- `gt`: greater then e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$gt: 60}})`
- `gte`: greater then OR equals e.g.`db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$gte: 60}})`
- `lt`: lower then e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$lt: 60}})`
  - `lte`: lower then OR equals e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$lt: 60}})`

**logical**

- `or`: documents that match any of the conditions e.g. `db.movies.find({$or: [{"rating.average": {$lt: 5}}, {"rating.average": {$gt: 9.3}}]})`
- `nor`: documents that DON'T match any of the conditions e.g. `db.movies.find({$nor: [{"rating.average": {$lt: 5}}, {"rating.average": {$gt: 9.3}}]})`
- `and`: all found documents must match elements of the array
  - IMPORTANT:
    - `db.movies.find({"rating.average": {$gt: 9}, genres: "Drama"})` is in most cases as
    - the same as `db.movies.find({$and: [{"rating.average": {$gt: 9}}, {genres: "Drama"}]})`
  - BUT `$and` solution is more secure
    - because if properties are used multiple times in a filter
    - e.g. `db.movies.find({"rating.average": {$gt: 9}, genres: "Drama"})`
    - ONLY the last mention of the property is used!!!
    - SO in that case `$and` NEEDS to be used
- `not`: find documents that include not a certain value e.g. `db.movies.find({runtime: {$not: {$eq: 60}}})`
  - is more complex, and can mostly be substituted with easier statements using `$ne`
  - e.g. `db.movies.find({runtime: {$ne: 60}})`

**element**

- `exists`: finds all documents that have an element that exists e.g. `db.users.find({age: {$exists: true}})`
  - IMPORTANT
    - an element is included although it might have the value `null`
    - e.g.`db.users.find({age: {$exists: false, $ne: null}})`
- `type`: e.g. "string", "double" (e.g. 2.42, 0213), "int" (e.g. 7, 32)
  - finds all documents which element have a certain **type** e.g. `db.users.find({phone: {$type: "string"}})`
  - finds all documents which element have certain **types** e.g. `db.users.find({phone: {$type: ["int", "string"]}})`

**evaluation**

- `regex`: allows to search for text in a key-value pair of a document
  - e.g. normal search like `db.movies.find({summary: "musical"})` only looks for full equality!!
  - regex enables to search for parts of text in a key-value pair e.g. `db.movies.find({summary: {$regex: /musical/}})`
    - a regex expression is always surrounded by `//`
    - and have in between e.g. `/musical/`
- `expr`: expression find documents where the comparison of two fields inside of the respective document equals true
  - e.g. where the volume is greater than the target for financial data `db.sales.find({$expr: {$gt: ["$volume", "$target"]}})`
  - e.g. where the number of visitors exceed the expected visitors e.g. `db.movieStars.find({$expr: {$gt: ["$visitors", "$expectedVisitors"]}})`
  - to access the value of the key-value pairs `"$someKey"` is needed
  - e.g. `db.sales.find({$expr: {$gt: [{$cond: {if: {$gte: ["$volume", 190]}, then: 190}}]}})`
  - e.g. `db.sales.find({$expr: {$gt: [{$cond: {if: {$gte: ["$volume", 190]}, then: {$subtract: ["$volume", 10]}, else: "$volume"}}]}})`

**array**

- ``:

**comments**

- ``:

  **geospatial**

- e.g. near some location
- ``:

1. **projetion operators**: modify the data presentation

The data presentation can be modified using these projetion operators:

- `$`
- `$elemMatch`
- `$meta`
- `$slice`

Commit message:

how to use size to find docus that have arrays that only include the following elements in a unsorted order

3_operations/crud-operations/2_read_find.md, after:

**Table of Contents**

- [Basic](#basic)
- [Methods](#methods)
  - [findOne()](#findone)
  - [find()](#find)
- [Filter](#filter)

# Basic

Get one or multiple documents

- in a collection
- e.g. `db.myCollection.find(filter, options)`
  - `db` access current database
  - `myCollection`access a collection (gets created if does not exists)
  - `find(filter, options)` method that gets executed on the collection, which parameters:
    - Filter: narrow down which documents to change
    - Options: configuration

# Methods

_For read the findOne() and find() methods exist:_

## findOne()

Get the first matching document it finds

- syntax `db.myCollection.findOne(filter, options)`
- e.g. `db.myCollection.findOne({ name: 1, contribs: 1 } )`
- gives back a document (NOT a cursor)
- arrays can be accessed via nested keys e.g. `db.users.findOne({"hobbies.title": "Sports"})`

## find()

Get one or more documents

- syntax `db.myCollection.find(filter, options)`
- e.g. `db.myCollection.find()`
- gives a cursor (not a document)
- arrays can be accessed via nested keys e.g. `db.users.find({"hobbies.title": "Sports"})`

Get **all** documents in a collection by passing

- no parameter als a filter
  - limited e.g. `db.myCollection.find()`
  - without limits e.g. `db.myCollection.find().toArray()`
  - find all documents and modify / print them `db.passengers.find().forEach((passengerData) => {printjson(passengerData)})`

**Additional functions** are possible after the find() method, such as:

- `pretty()` print the data more nicely
- `count` identify how many documents exist e.g. `db.myCollection.find().count()`
- `max()` get the max value
- `min()` get the min value
- `map()` applies a function for each document and returns the new array
- `forEach()` applies a function for each document and returns NOTHING!

Important:

- all documents are returned by passing no parameter
- a nicer format for an output can be archived via `db.products.find().pretty()`
- not all documents are return
  - MongoDB aborts after a certian amount of objects
  - because MongoDB does not encourage to return like 20 million objects
  - but the command `it` can be used to show more
  - this is because MongoDB does not return
    - an array of objects
    - but a cursor object that enables to cycle through the results
    - the function `.toArray()` will exhaust the cursor object and show everything

# Filter

_Both findOne() and find() methods support all filter possibilities:_

Actually filter the documents in a collection

- can work with nested documents using "": e.g. `db.movies.findOne({"rating.average": {$gt: 7}})`
- match equality against a **single value**: e.g. `flightData.find({intercontinental: true})` OR
- match using a **query selectors and projection operators**:

1. **query selectors**

Documents can be found using these query selectors:

**comparison**

- `eq`: find documents which equal one value certain values, whereby equality differs for primitive data and arrays:
- primitive data e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$eq: 60}})` is the same as `db.movies.findOne({runtime: 60})`
- arrays
  - contains the element e.g. `db.movies.findOne({genres: {$eq: "Drama"}})` is the same as `db.movies.findOne({genres: "Drama"})`
  - ONLY contains the element e.g. `db.movies.findOne({genres: {$eq: ["Drama"]}})` is the same as `db.movies.findOne({genres: ["Drama"]})`
- `ne`: find documents which equal NOT one value e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$ne: 60}})`
- `in`: find documents which equal MULTIPLE values e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$in: [30, 42]}})`
- `nin`: find documents which NOT equal MULTIPLE values e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$nin: [30, 42]}})`
- `gt`: greater then e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$gt: 60}})`
- `gte`: greater then OR equals e.g.`db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$gte: 60}})`
- `lt`: lower then e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$lt: 60}})`
  - `lte`: lower then OR equals e.g. `db.movies.findOne({runtime: {$lt: 60}})`

**logical**

- `or`: documents that match any of the conditions
  - primitive data e.g. `db.movies.find({$or: [{"rating.average": {$lt: 5}}, {"rating.average": {$gt: 9.3}}]})`
  - arrays e.g. `db.users.find({$or: [{"hobbies.title": "Yoga"}, {"hobbies.title": "Sports"}]})`
- `nor`: documents that DON'T match any of the conditions e.g. `db.movies.find({$nor: [{"rating.average": {$lt: 5}}, {"rating.average": {$gt: 9.3}}]})`
- `and`: all found documents must match elements of the array
  - IMPORTANT:
    - `db.movies.find({"rating.average": {$gt: 9}, genres: "Drama"})` is in most cases as
    - the same as `db.movies.find({$and: [{"rating.average": {$gt: 9}}, {genres: "Drama"}]})`
  - BUT `$and` solution is more secure
    - because if properties are used multiple times in a filter
    - e.g. `db.movies.find({"rating.average": {$gt: 9}, genres: "Drama"})`
    - ONLY the last mention of the property is used!!!
    - SO in that case `$and` NEEDS to be used
- `not`: find documents that include not a certain value e.g. `db.movies.find({runtime: {$not: {$eq: 60}}})`
  - is more complex, and can mostly be substituted with easier statements using `$ne`
  - e.g. `db.movies.find({runtime: {$ne: 60}})`

**element**

- `exists`: finds all documents that have an element that exists e.g. `db.users.find({age: {$exists: true}})`
  - IMPORTANT
    - an element is included although it might have the value `null`
    - e.g.`db.users.find({age: {$exists: false, $ne: null}})`
- `type`: e.g. "string", "double" (e.g. 2.42, 0213), "int" (e.g. 7, 32)
  - finds all documents which element have a certain **type** e.g. `db.users.find({phone: {$type: "string"}})`
  - finds all documents which element have certain **types** e.g. `db.users.find({phone: {$type: ["int", "string"]}})`

**evaluation**

- `regex`: allows to search for text in a key-value pair of a document
  - e.g. normal search like `db.movies.find({summary: "musical"})` only looks for full equality!!
  - regex enables to search for parts of text in a key-value pair e.g. `db.movies.find({summary: {$regex: /musical/}})`
    - a regex expression is always surrounded by `//`
    - and have in between e.g. `/musical/`
- `expr`: expression find documents where the comparison of two fields inside of the respective document equals true
  - e.g. where the volume is greater than the target for financial data `db.sales.find({$expr: {$gt: ["$volume", "$target"]}})`
  - e.g. where the number of visitors exceed the expected visitors e.g. `db.movieStars.find({$expr: {$gt: ["$visitors", "$expectedVisitors"]}})`
  - to access the value of the key-value pairs `"$someKey"` is needed
  - e.g. `db.sales.find({$expr: {$gt: [{$cond: {if: {$gte: ["$volume", 190]}, then: 190}}]}})`
  - e.g. `db.sales.find({$expr: {$gt: [{$cond: {if: {$gte: ["$volume", 190]}, then: {$subtract: ["$volume", 10]}, else: "$volume"}}]}})`

**array**

- `size`: find docus with exact amount of elements in an nested array
  - until now, MongoDB only supports exact sizes, no $gt or $lt
  - e.g. `db.users.find({hobbies: {$size: 3}})`
- `all`: find docus that have arrays that
  - ONLY include the following elements in a unsorted order
  - e.g. `db.movieStars.find({genre: {$all: ["action", "thriller"]}})`
  - which is in contrast to
    - .g. `db.movieStars.find({genre: ["action", "thriller"]})`
    - where the order of elements in an array is important
- ``:

**comments**

- ``:

  **geospatial**

- e.g. near some location
- ``:

1. **projetion operators**: modify the data presentation

The data presentation can be modified using these projetion operators:

- `$`
- `$elemMatch`
- `$meta`
- `$slice`
